Draft release announcement for VAST v3.0 (#2865)
tenzir/vast: web/blog/vast-v3.0/index.md

---
draft: true
title: VAST v3.0
description: VASTQL Refreshments
authors: [dominiklohmann, mavam]
date: 2023-01-20

> image: /path/to/image.png

Reviewer: Boilerplate comment to track making this image.

Author: I've put this as a TODO into the blog post itself; we want to merge this as a draft and then I will hand this over.

tags: [release, vastql, cef, performance, introspection, regex]
---

[VAST v3.0][github-vast-release] is out. The release brings some major updates
to VAST's query language, including the ability to search using regular
expressions.

[github-vast-release]: https://github.com/tenzir/vast/releases/tag/v3.0.0

<!--truncate-->

## VASTQL Upgrades

The 3.x series of VAST releases is all about the **VAST** **Q**uery
**L**anguage. To kick this off, we've done some breaking changes to the language
that we've wanted to do in quite a while. Here's a summary:

1. Several built-in types have a new name:
   - `int` → `int64`
   - `count` → `uint64`
   - `real` → `double`
   - `addr` → `ip`
   
   The old names are still supported for the time being, but trigger a warning
   on startup. We will remove support for the old names in a future release.

> 2. The match operator `~` and its negated form `!~` no longer exist. Use queries
>    of the form `lhs == /rhs/` and `lhs != /rhs/` to perform searches with
>    regular expressions. Such queries now work for all string fields in addition
>    to the previously supported `#type` meta extractor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The match operator `~` and its negated form `!~` no longer exist. Use `==` and `!=` instead to perform searches with regular expressions, e.g., `url == /^https?.*/`. Such queries now work for all string fields in addition to the previously supported `#type` meta extractor.
```

[LR]HS is not something the average users knows. Let's keep it super simple.

> 3. Queries of the form `#field == "some.field.name"` no longer exists to check
>    for the existence of a field. Use `some.field.name != nil` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. We removed the `#field` meta extractor. That is, queries of the form `#field == "some.field.name"` no longer work. Use `some.field.name != nil` to check for field existence moving forward.
```

> 4. The boolean literal values `T` and `F` are now `true` and `false`
>    respectively. For example the query `suricata.alert.alerted == T` is no
>    longer valid; use `suricata.alert.alerted == true` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. We renamed the boolean literals `T` and `F` to `true` and `false`,
   respectively. For example the query `suricata.alert.alerted == T` is no
   longer valid; use `suricata.alert.alerted == true` instead.
```

Our goal is for these changes to make the query language feel more natural to
our users. We've got [big plans][rfc-001] on how to extend it—and this felt very

> much necessary as a preparatory step to making the language more useful.

Reviewer: Is it on purpose that you don't mention the term "pipeline" here?

Author: Yes. We've simply not yet been clear on the terminology, and it's somewhere between VASTQL the query language and VASTQL pipelines.

I think this is much more a question for Oliver in terms of branding, but I wanted to make him do a pass over this announcement anyways after we've got all the content we want and before we publish it.

[rfc-001]: https://github.com/tenzir/vast/blob/master/rfc/001-composable-pipelines/README.md

<!-- TODO: Make sure this is actually ready before we release. -->

## Regular Expression Evaluation

VAST now supports searching with regular expressions. For example, let's say you
looking for all events that contain a GUID surrounded by braces whose third and
fourth section are `5ec2-7015`:

> ```json title="vast export -n 1 json '/\{[0-9a-f]{8}-[0-9a-f]{4}-5ec2-7015-[0-9a-f]{12}\}/'"

Reviewer: Nice use of `title`!

          timestamp: time
      - flow_id:
          type: uint64
          attributes:
            index: hash
      - pcap_cnt: uint64
      - vlan:
          list: uint64
      - in_iface: string
      - src_ip: ip
      - src_port:
          port: uint64
      - dest_ip: ip
      - dest_port:
          port: uint64
      - proto: string
      - event_type: string
      - community_id:
          type: string
          attributes:
            index: hash
      - flow:
          suricata.component.flow:
            record:
              - pkts_toserver: uint64
              - pkts_toclient: uint64
              - bytes_toserver: uint64
              - bytes_toclient: uint64
              - start: time
              - end: time
              - age: uint64
              - state: string
              - reason: string
              - alerted: bool
      - app_proto: string
```

:::tip Filter Schemas
The `vast show schemas` command supports filtering not just by the exact name of
a schema, but also by the module name. E.g., `vast show schemas zeek` will print
a list of all schemas in the Zeek module that the VAST server holds data for.
:::

## Common Event Format (CEF) Parser

> This release include a new reader plugin for the [Common Event Format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release includes a new reader plugin for the [Common Event Format
```

    "pFileHash": "1F955612E7DB9BB037751A89DAE78DFAF03D7C1BCC62DF2EF019F6CFE6D1BBA7",
    "pprUser": "tikasrv01\\administrator",
    "ppParams": "C:\\Windows\\Explorer.EXE",
    "pssdeep": "49152:2nxldYuopV6ZhcUYehydN7A0Fnvf2+ecNyO8w0w8A7/eFwIAD8j3:Gxj/7hUgsww8a0OD8j3",
    "pSign": "Signed and has certificate info",
    "gpFileHash": "CFC6A18FC8FE7447ECD491345A32F0F10208F114B70A0E9D1CD72F6070D5B36F",
    "gpprUser": "tikasrv01\\administrator",
    "gpParams": "C:\\Windows\\system32\\userinit.exe",
    "gpssdeep": "384:YtOYTIcNkWE9GHAoGLcVB5QGaRW5SmgydKz3fvnJYunOTBbsMoMH3nxENoWlymW:YLTVNkzGgoG+5BSmUfvJMdsq3xYu",
    "gpSign": "Signed",
    "actRem": "Kill, Rename"
  }
}
```

:::note Syslog Header
Sometimes CEF is prefixed with a syslog header. VAST currently only supports the
"raw" form without the syslog header. We are working on support for composable
*generic* formats, e.g., syslog, where the message can basically be any other
existing format.
:::

<!-- TODO: Consider making this a builtin rather than a plugin before the
release; the CEF plugin has no additional dependencies, so there is little

> reason for it not to be. -->

Reviewer: Agreed. Do we have dev docs on this?

Author: We don't, but I've talked with Benno about this previously and we agreed that in general builtins are always preferred if there is no custom CMake required.

## Tidbits

This VAST release contains a fair amount of other changes and interesting
improvements. As always, the [changelog][changelog] contains a complete list of
user-facing changes since the last release.

Here are some entries that we want to highlight:

[changelog]: //vast.io/changelog#v300

### Removing Empty Fields from JSON Output

The `vast export json` command gained new options in addition to the already
existing `--omit-nulls`: Pass `--omit-empty-records`, `--omit-empty-lists`,
or `--omit-empty-maps` to cause VAST not to display empty records, lists, or
maps respectively.

The flag `--omit-empty` empty combines the three new options and `--omit-nulls`,
essentially causing VAST not to render empty values at all. To set these options
globally, add the following to your vast.yaml configuration file:

```yaml
vast:
  export:
    json:
      # Always omit empty records and lists when using the JSON export format,
      # but keep empty lists and maps.
      omit-nulls: true
      omit-empty-records: true
      omit-empty-maps: false
      omit-empty-lists: false
```

<!-- TODO: Make sure this is actually ready before we release. -->

### Faster Shutdown

> VAST processes now shut down much more quickly, which especially improves the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VAST processes now shut down faster, which especially improves the
```

A brief quantification of this would be nice.

performance of the `vast import` and `vast export` commands for small amounts of
data ingested or quickly finishing queries.

### Connection Stability

Client processes now attempt to connect to VAST server processes repeatedly
until the configured connection timeout expires. We found this to generally
improve reliability of services with multiple VAST clients, for which we often
encountered problems with VAST clients being unable to connect to a VAST server
when started immediately after the VAST server—which at that point in time was

> not ready to acccept the connection yet.

Reviewer: To me, the main benefit is that you can now start the client before the server, which helps in Docker Compose and other automated environments. If you agree, then it'd be great to lead with this.

Additionally, we've fixed a bug that caused VAST to crash when thousands of
clients attempted to connect at around the same time.

### Performance Improvements

<!-- Write about performance improvements and benchmark results here -->

### Slim Docker Image

> The new `tenzir/vast-slim` Docker Image is an alternative to the existing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new `tenzir/vast-slim` Docker image is an alternative to the existing
```

YMMV

`tenzir/vast` Docker image that comes in at just under 40 MB in size—less than a
third than the regular image, making it even quicker to get started with VAST.

### Bundled Python Bindings

VAST installations now include Python bindings to VAST as a site package. The

> package is called  `vast` and also available [separately on PyPI][vast-pypi].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package is called `vast` and also available [separately on PyPI][vast-pypi].
```

---
draft: true
title: VAST v3.0
description: VASTQL Refreshments
authors: [dominiklohmann, mavam]
date: 2023-01-20
image: /path/to/image.png
tags: [release, vastql, cef, performance, introspection, regex]
---

[VAST v3.0][github-vast-release] is out. The release brings some major updates
to VAST's query language, including the ability to search using regular
expressions.

[github-vast-release]: https://github.com/tenzir/vast/releases/tag/v3.0.0

<!--truncate-->

> ## VASTQL Upgrades

Author: This needs another section now that we merged the initial version of export pipelines. We should also mention the head and taste operators, and the deprecation of the operator YAML syntax.
